Chapter12

IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES

We know that all living organisms need food. disturbing the balances maintaining it. Hence,
Food supplies proteins, carbohydrates, fats, there is a need for sustainable practices in
vitamins and minerals, all of which we require agriculture and animal husbandry.
for body development, growth and health. Also, simply increasing grain production
Both plants and animals are major sources for storage in warehouses cannot solve the
of food for us. We obtain most of this food problem of malnutrition and hunger. People
from agriculture and animal husbandry. should have money to purchase food. Food

We read in newspapers that efforts are security depends on both availability of food
always being made to improve production and access to it. The majority of our
from agriculture and animal husbandry. Why population depends on agriculture for their
is this necessary? Why we cannot make do livelihood. Increasing the incomes of people
with the current levels of production? working in agriculture is therefore necessary

India is a very populous country. Our to combat the problem of hunger. Scientific
population is more than one billion people, management practices should be undertaken
and it is still growing. As food for this growing to obtain high yields from farms. For
population, we will soon need more than a sustained livelihood, one should undertake
quarter of a billion tonnes of grain every year. mixed farming, intercropping, and integrated
This can be done by farming on more land. farming practices, for example, combine
But India is already intensively cultivated. As agriculture with livestock/poultry/fisheries/
a result, we do not have any major scope for bee-keeping.
increasing the area of land under cultivation. The question thus becomes – how do we
Therefore, it is necessary to increase our increase the yields of crops and livestock?
production efficiency for both crops and
livestock. 12.1 Improvement in Crop Yields

Efforts to meet the food demand by
increasing food production have led to some Cereals such as wheat, rice, maize, millets and
successes so far. We have had the green sorghum provide us carbohydrate for energy
revolution, which contributed to increased requirement. Pulses like gram (chana), pea
food-grain production. We have also had the (matar), black gram (urad), green gram (moong),
white revolution, which has led to better and pigeon pea (arhar), lentil (masoor), provide us with
more efficient use as well as availability of milk. protein. And oil seeds including soyabean,

However, these revolutions mean that our ground nut, sesame, castor, mustard, linseed and
natural resources are getting used more sunflower provide us with necessary fats (Fig.
intensively. As a result, there are more 12.1). Vegetables, spices and fruits provide a
chances of causing damage to our natural range of vitamins and minerals in addition to
resources to the point of destroying their small amounts of proteins, carbohydrates and
balance completely. Therefore, it is important fats. In addition to these food crops, fodder crops
that we should increase food production like berseem, oats or sudan grass are raised as
without degrading our environment and food for the livestock.

140 SCIENCE

Reprint 2025-26



the kharif season from the month of June to
October, and some of the crops are grown in
the winter season, called the rabi season from
November to April. Paddy, soyabean, pigeon
pea, maize, cotton, green gram and black
gram are kharif crops, whereas wheat, gram,
peas, mustard, linseed are rabi crops.

In India there has been a four times
increase in the production of food grains from
1952 to 2010 with only 25% increase in the
cultivable land area. How has this increase
in production been achieved? If we think of
the practices involved in farming, we can see
that we can divide it into three stages. The
first is the choice of seeds for planting. The
second is the nurturing of the crop plants.
The third is the protection of the growing and
harvested crops from loss. Thus, the major
groups of activities for improving crop yields
can be classified as:

• Crop variety improvement
• Crop production improvement
• Crop protection management.

12.1.1 CROP VARIETY IMPROVEMENT

This approach depends on finding a crop
variety that can give a good yield. Varieties or
strains of crops can be selected by breeding
for various useful characteristics such as
disease resistance, response to fertilisers,

Fig. 12.1: Different types of crops product quality and high yields. One way of
incorporating desirable characters into crop
varieties is by hybridisation. Hybridisation

uestion refers to crossing between genetically

Q 1. What do we get from cereals, dissimilar plants. This crossing may be
pulses, fruits and vegetables? intervarietal (between different varieties),

interspecific (between two different species of
the same genus) or intergeneric (between
different genera). Another way of improving

Different crops require different climatic the crop is by introducing a gene that would
conditions, temperature and photoperiods for provide the desired characteristic. This
their growth and completion of their life cycle. results in genetically modified crops.
Photoperiods are related to the duration of For new varieties of crops to be accepted,
sunlight. Growth of plants and flowering are it is necessary that the variety produces high
dependent on sunlight. As we all know, plants yields under different conditions that are
manufacture their food in sunlight by the found in different areas. Farmers would need
process of photosynthesis. There are some to be provided with good quality seeds of a
crops, which are grown in rainy season, called particular variety, that is, the seeds should all

IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 141

Reprint 2025-26



be of the same variety and germinate under less nutrients are consumed by these
the same conditions. crops. Thus developing varieties of

Cultivation practices and crop yield are desired agronomic characters help give
related to weather, soil quality and availability higher productivity.
of water. Since weather conditions such as
drought and flood situations are uestions
unpredictable, varieties that can be grown in
diverse climatic conditions are useful. 1. How do biotic and abiotic factors

Similarly, varieties tolerant to high soil salinity Q affect crop production?

have been developed. Some of the factors for 2. What are the desirable agronomic

which variety improvement is done are: characteristics for crop

• Higher yield: To increase the improvements?

productivity of the crop per acre.
• Improved quality: Quality

considerations of crop products vary
from crop to crop. Baking quality is 12.1.2 CROP PRODUCTION MANAGEMENT

important in wheat, protein quality in
In India, as in many other agriculture-based

pulses, oil quality in oilseeds and
countries, farming ranges from small to very

preserving quality in fruits and
vegetables. large farms. Different farmers thus have more

• Biotic and abiotic resistance: Crops or less land, money and access to information

production can go down due to biotic and technologies. In short, it is the money or
(diseases, insects and nematodes) and financial conditions that allow farmers to take
abiotic (drought, salinity, water up different farming practices and agricultural
logging, heat, cold and frost) stresses technologies. There is a correlation between
under different situations. Varieties higher inputs and yields. Thus, the farmer’s
resistant to these stresses can improve purchasing capacity for inputs decides
crop production.

cropping system and production practices.
• Change in maturity duration: The

Therefore, production practices can be at
shorter the duration of the crop from
sowing to harvesting, the more different levels. They include ‘no cost’

economical is the variety. Such short production, ‘low cost’ production and ‘high

durations allow farmers to grow cost’ production practices.
multiple rounds of crops in a year.
Short duration also reduces the cost 12.1.2 (i)  NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT
of crop production. Uniform maturity
makes the harvesting process easy Just as we need food for development, growth

and reduces losses during harvesting. and well-being, plants also require nutrients
• Wider adaptability: Developing for growth. Nutrients are supplied to plants

varieties for wider adaptability will by air, water and soil. There are several
help in stabilising the crop production nutrients which are essential for plants. Air
under dif ferent environmental supplies carbon and oxygen, hydrogen comes
conditions. One variety can then be from water, and soil supplies the other thirteen
grown under different climatic

nutrients to plants. Amongst these, some are
conditions in different areas.

required in large quantities and are therefore
• Desirable agronomic characteristics:

Tallness and profuse branching are called macro-nutrients. The other nutrients are

desirable characters for fodder crops. used by plants in small quantities and are
Dwarfness is desired in cereals, so that therefore called micro-nutrients (Table 12.1).

142 SCIENCE

Reprint 2025-26



our environment from excessive use of
Table 12.1: Nutrients supplied fertilizers. Using biological waste material is

by air, water and soil also a way of recycling farm waste. Based on
the kind of biological material used, manure

Source Nutrients can be classified as:
(i) Compost and vermi-compost: The

Air carbon, oxygen process in which farm waste material
like livestock excreta (cow dung, etc.),

Water hydrogen, oxygen vegetable waste, animal refuse,

Soil (i) Macronutrients: domestic waste, sewage waste, straw,

nitrogen, phosphorus, eradicated weeds etc. is decomposed

potassium, calcium, in pits is known as composting. The

magnesium, sulphur compost is rich in organic matter and
nutrients. Compost is also prepared

(ii) Micronutrients:
by using earthworms to hasten the

iron, manganese, boron,
process of decomposition of plant and

zinc, copper,
animal refuse. This is called

molybdenum, chlorine
vermi-compost.

(ii) Green manure: Prior to the sowing of
Deficiency of these nutrients affects the crop seeds, some plants like sun

physiological processes in plants including hemp or guar are grown and then
reproduction, growth and susceptibility to mulched by ploughing them into the
diseases. To increase the yield, the soil can be soil. These green plants thus turn into
enriched by supplying these nutrients in the green manure which helps in
form of manure and fertilizers. enriching the soil in nitrogen

and phosphorus.
uestions

1. What are macro-nutrients and FERTILIZERS

Q why are they called macro- Fertilizers are commercially produced plant
nutrients? nutrients. Fertilizers supply nitrogen,

2. How do plants get nutrients? phosphorus and potassium. They are used
to ensure good vegetative growth (leaves,
branches and flowers), giving rise to healthy
plants. Fertilizers are a factor in the higher

MANURE yields of high-cost farming.
Fertilizers should be applied carefully in

Manure contains large quantities of organic terms of proper dose, time, and observing pre-
matter and also supplies small quantities of and post-application precautions for their
nutrients to the soil. Manure is prepared by complete utilisation. For example, sometimes
the decomposition of animal excreta and plant fertilizers get washed away due to excessive
waste. Manure helps in enriching soil with irrigation and are not fully absorbed by the
nutrients and organic matter and increasing plants. This excess fertilizer then leads to
soil fertility. The bulk of organic matter in water pollution.
manure helps in improving the soil structure. Also, as we have seen in the previous class,
This involves increasing the water holding continuous use of fertilizers in an area can
capacity in sandy soils. In clayey soils, the destroy soil fertility because the organic
large quantities of organic matter help in matter in the soil is not replenished and
drainage and in avoiding water logging. micro-organisms in the soil are harmed by the

In using manure we use biological waste fertilizers used. Short-term benefits of using
material, which is advantageous in protecting fertilizers and long-term benefits of using

IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 143

Reprint 2025-26



manure for maintaining soil fertility have to India has a wide variety of water resources
be considered while aiming for optimum yields and a highly varied climate. Under such
in crop production. conditions, several different kinds of irrigation

systems are adopted to supply water to

uestion agricultural lands depending on the kinds of
water resources available. These include wells,

Q 1. Compare the use of manure and canals, rivers and tanks.
fertilizers in maintaining soil

• Wells:  There are two types of wells,
fertility. namely dug wells and tube wells. In a

dug well, water is collected from water
Organic farming is a farming system with bearing strata. Tube wells can tap

minimal or no use of chemicals as fertilizers, water from the deeper strata. From
herbicides, pesticides, etc., and with a these wells, water is lifted by pumps
maximum input of organic manures, recycled for irrigation.
farm-wastes (straw and livestock excreta), use • Canals: This is usually an elaborate
of bio-agents such as culture of blue green and extensive irrigation system. In this
algae in preparation of biofertilizers, neem system canals receive water from one
leaves or turmeric specifically in grain storage or more reservoirs or from rivers. The
as bio-pesticides, with healthy cropping main canal is divided into branch
systems [mixed cropping, inter-cropping and canals having further distributaries to
crop rotation as discussed below in 12.1.2.(iii)]. irrigate fields.
These cropping systems are beneficial in • River Lift Systems: In areas where
insect, pest and wheat control besides canal flow is insufficient or irregular
providing nutrients. due to inadequate reservoir release,

the lift system is more rational. Water
12.1.2 (ii)  IRRIGATION is directly drawn from the rivers for

Most agriculture in India is rain-fed, that is, supplementing irrigation in areas

the success of crops in most areas is close to rivers.

dependent on timely monsoons and sufficient • Tanks: These are small storage

rainfall spread through most of the growing reservoirs, which intercept and store

season. Hence, poor monsoons cause crop the run-off of smaller catchment

failure. Ensuring that the crops get water at areas.
the right stages during their growing season Fresh initiatives for increasing the water
can increase the expected yields of any crop. available for agriculture include rainwater
Therefore, many measures are used to bring harvesting and watershed management. This
more and more agricultural land involves building small check-dams which
under irrigation. lead to an increase in ground water levels.

The check-dams stop the rainwater from
Droughts occur because of scarcity or flowing away and also reduce soil erosion.
irregular distribution of rains. Drought
poses a threat to rain-fed farming 12.1.2 (iii)  CROPPING PATTERNS
areas, where farmers do not use
irrigation for crop production and Different ways of growing crops can be used
depend only on rain. Light soils have to give maximum benefit.
less water retention capacity. In areas Mixed cropping is growing two or more
with light soils, crops get adversely crops simultaneously on the same piece of
affected by drought conditions. land, for example, wheat + gram, or wheat +
Scientists have developed some crop mustard, or groundnut + sunflower. This
varieties which can tolerate drought reduces risk and gives some insurance
conditions. against failure of one of the crops.

144 SCIENCE

Reprint 2025-26

More to  know



Inter-cropping is growing two or more (gokhroo), Parthenium (gajar ghas), Cyperus
crops simultaneously on the same field in a rotundus (motha). They compete for food,
definite pattern (Fig.12.2). A few rows of one space and light. Weeds take up nutrients and
crop alternate with a few rows of a second reduce the growth of the crop. Therefore,
crop, for example, soyabean + maize, or finger removal of weeds from cultivated fields during
millet (bajra) + cowpea (lobia). The crops are the early stages of crop growth is essential for
selected such that their nutrient a good harvest.
requirements are different. This ensures Generally insect pests attack the plants
maximum utilisation of the nutrients in three ways: (i) they cut the root, stem and
supplied, and also prevents pests and leaf, (ii) they suck the cell sap from various
diseases from spreading to all the plants parts of the plant, and (iii) they bore into stem
belonging to one crop in a field. This way, and fruits. They thus affect the health of the
both crops can give better returns. crop and reduce yields.

Diseases in plants are caused by
pathogens such as bacteria, fungi and viruses.
These pathogens can be present in and
transmitted through the soil, water and air.

Weeds, insects and diseases can be
controlled by various methods. One of the
most commonly used methods is the use of
pesticides, which include herbicides,
insecticides and fungicides. These chemicals
are sprayed on crop plants or used for treating
seeds and soil. However, excessive use of
these chemicals creates problems, since they
can be poisonous to many plant and animal
species and cause environmental pollution.

Weed control methods also include
mechanical removal. Preventive methods

Fig. 12.2 : Intercropping such as proper seed bed preparation, timely
sowing of crops, intercropping and crop

The growing of different crops on a piece rotation also help in weed control. Some other
of land in a pre-planned succession is known preventive measures against pests are the use
as crop rotation. Depending upon the of resistant varieties, and summer ploughing,
duration, crop rotation is done for different in which fields are ploughed deep in summers
crop combinations. The availability of moisture to destroy weeds and pests.
and irrigation facilities decide the choice of the
crop to be cultivated after one harvest. If crop uestion
rotation is done properly then two or three
crops can be grown in a year with 1. Which of the following conditions
good harvests. will give the most benefits? Why?

(a) Farmers use high-quality
seeds, do not adopt

12.1.3 CROP PROTECTION MANAGEMENT
irrigation or use fertilizers.

Field crops are infested by a large number of Q (b) Farmers use ordinary
weeds, insect pests and diseases. If weeds and seeds, adopt irrigation and
pests are not controlled at the appropriate use fertilizer.
time then they can damage the crops so much (c) Farmers use quality seeds,
that most of the crop is lost. adopt irrigation, use

Weeds are unwanted plants in the fertilizer and use crop
cultivated field, for example, Xanthium protection measures.

IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 145

Reprint 2025-26



Table 12.2: Nutritional values of animal products

Animal Per cent (%) Nutrients
Products

Fat Protein Sugar Minerals Water Vitamins

Milk (Cow) 3.60 4.00 4.50 0.70 87.20 B1, B2, B12, D, E

Egg 12.00 13.00 * 1.00 74.00 B2, D

Meat 3.60 21.10 * 1.10 74.20 B2, B12

Fish 2.50 19.00 * 1.30 77.20 Niacin, D, A

*Present in very small amounts

Activity _____________12.1 Activity _____________12.2
• Visit a nearby garden/agricultural • Collect grains/seeds of cereals,

field and make a list of the weeds and pulses and oil seeds and gather
the flowers/crops found in the area. information about the seasons in
Also, make a list of insect pests, if which they are sown and harvested.
any, infesting the flowers/crops.

12.2 Animal Husbandry
STORAGE OF GRAINS

Storage losses in agricultural produce can be Animal husbandry is the scientific

very high. Factors responsible for such losses management of animal livestock. It includes

are biotic— insects, rodents, fungi, mites and various aspects such as feeding, breeding and

bacteria, and abiotic— inappropriate moisture disease control. Animal-based farming

and temperatures in the place of storage. These includes cattle, goat, sheep, poultry and fish
factors cause degradation in quality, loss in farming. As the population increases and as
weight, poor germinability, discolouration of living standards increase, the demand for
produce, all leading to poor marketability. milk, eggs and meat is also going up. Also,
These factors can be controlled by proper the growing awareness of the need for
treatment and by systematic management of humane treatment of livestock has brought
warehouses. in new limitations in livestock farming. Thus,

Preventive and control measures are used livestock production also needs to be improved.
before grains are stored for future use. They
include strict cleaning of the produce before 12.2.1 CATTLE FARMING
storage, proper drying of the produce first in
sunlight and then in shade, and fumigation Cattle husbandry is done for two purposes—
using chemicals that can kill pests. milk and draught labour for agricultural work

such as tilling, irrigation and carting. Indian
uestions cattle belong to two different species, Bos

indicus, cows, and Bos bubalis, buffaloes.
1. Why should preventive measures Milk-producing females are called milch

Q and biological control methods be animals (dairy animals), while the ones used
preferred for protecting crops? for farm labour are called draught animals.

2. What factors may be responsible Milk production depends, to some extent,
for losses of grains during on the duration of the lactation period,
storage? meaning the period of milk production after

146 SCIENCE

Reprint 2025-26



loose hair. They should be sheltered under
well-ventilated roofed sheds that protect them
from rain, heat and cold. The floor of the cattle
shed needs to be sloping so as to stay dry
and to facilitate cleaning.

The food requirements of dairy animals
are of two types: (a) maintenance
requirement, which is the food required to
support the animal to live a healthy life, and
(b) milk producing requirement, which is the
type of food required during the lactation
period. Animal feed includes: (a) roughage,
which is largely fibre, and (b) concentrates,
which are low in fibre and contain relatively
high levels of proteins and other nutrients.
Cattle need balanced rations containing all
nutrients in proportionate amounts. Besides
such nutritious food material, certain feed

Fig. 12.3: Indigenous milch breed of cattle additives containing micronutrients promote
the health and milk output of dairy animals.

the birth of a calf. So, milk production can be Cattle suffer from a number of diseases.
increased by increasing the lactation period. The diseases, besides causing death, reduce
Exotic or foreign breeds (for example, Jersey, milk production. A healthy animal feeds
Brown Swiss) are selected for long lactation regularly and has a normal posture. The
periods, while local breeds (for example, Red parasites of cattle may be both external
Sindhi, Sahiwal) show excellent resistance to parasites and internal parasites. The external
diseases. The two can be cross-bred to get parasites live on the skin and mainly cause
animals with both the desired qualities. skin diseases. The internal parasites like

worms, affect stomach and intestine while
uestion flukes damage the liver. Infectious diseases

are also caused by bacteria and viruses.

Q 1. Which method is commonly used
Vaccinations are given to farm animals

for improving cattle breeds and
against many major viral and bacterial

why?
diseases.

12.2.2 POULTRY FARMING
Activity _____________12.3

Poultry farming is undertaken to raise
• Visit a livestock farm. Note the domestic fowl for egg production and chicken

following: meat. Therefore, improved poultry breeds are
(1) Number of cattle and number of developed and farmed to produce layers for

different breeds. eggs and broilers for meat.
(2) The amount of daily milk production

The cross-breeding programmes between
from the different breeds.

Indian (indigenous, for example, Aseel) and
Proper cleaning and shelter facilities for foreign (exotic, for example, Leghorn) breeds

cows and buffaloes are required for humane for variety improvement are focused on to
farming, for the health of the animals and develop new varieties for the following
for production of clean milk as well. Animals desirable traits—
require regular brushing to remove dirt and (i) number and quality of chicks;

IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 147

Reprint 2025-26



(ii) dwarf broiler parent for commercial The ration (daily food requirement) for broilers
chick production; is protein rich with adequate fat. The level of

(iii) summer adaptation capacity/ vitamins A and K is kept high in the poultry
tolerance to high temperature; feeds.

(iv) low maintenance requirements; Poultry fowl suffer from a number of
(v) reduction in the size of the egg-laying diseases caused by virus, bacteria, fungi,

bird with ability to utilise more parasites, as well as from nutritional
fibrous cheaper diets formulated deficiencies. These necessitate proper
using agricultural by-products. cleaning, sanitation, and spraying of

disinfectants at regular intervals. Appropriate
vaccination can prevent the occurrence of
infectious diseases and reduce loss of poultry
during an outbreak of disease.

uestions
1. What management practices are

common in dairy and poultry
farming?

2. What are the differences between
Aseel Leghorn

broilers and layers and in their
Fig. 12.4 Q management?

uestion
Activity _____________12.4

1. Discuss the implications of the

Q following statement: • Visit a local poultry farm. Observe
“It is interesting to note that types of breeds and note the type of

poultry is India’s most efficient ration, housing and lighting facilities
given to them. Identify the growers,

converter of low fibre food stuff
layers and broilers.

(which is unfit for human
consumption) into highly
nutritious animal protein food.” 12.2.3 FISH PRODUCTION

EGG AND BROILER PRODUCTION Fish is a cheap source of animal protein for
our food. Fish production includes the finned

Broiler chickens are fed with vitamin-rich true fish as well as shellfish such as prawns
supplementary feed for good growth rate and and molluscs. There are two ways of obtaining
better feed efficiency. Care is taken to avoid fish. One is from natural resources, which is
mortality and to maintain feathering and called capture fishing. The other way is by
carcass quality. They are produced as broilers fish farming, which is called culture fishery.
and sent to market for meat purposes. The water source of the fish can be either

For good production of poultry birds, good seawater or fresh water, such as in rivers and
management practices are important. These ponds. Fishing can thus be done both by
include maintenance of temperature and capture and culture of fish in marine and
hygienic conditions in housing and poultry freshwater ecosystems.
feed, as well as prevention and control of
diseases and pests. 12.2.3 (i) MARINE FISHERIES

The housing, nutritional and
environmental requirements of broilers are India’s marine fishery resources include
somewhat different from those of egg layers. 7500 km of coastline and the deep seas

148 SCIENCE

Reprint 2025-26



beyond it. Popular marine fish varieties In such a system, a combination of five or
include pomphret, mackerel, tuna, sardines, six fish species is used in a single fishpond.
and Bombay duck. Marine fish are caught These species are selected so that they do
using many kinds of fishing nets from fishing not compete for food among them having
boats. Yields are increased by locating large different types of food habits. As a result, the
schools of fish in the open sea using satellites food available in all the parts of the pond is
and echo-sounders. used. As Catlas are surface feeders, Rohus

Some marine fish of high economic value feed in the middle-zone of the pond, Mrigals
are also farmed in seawater. This includes and Common Carps are bottom feeders, and
finned fishes like mullets, bhetki, and pearl Grass Carps feed on the weeds, together these
spots, shellfish such as prawns (Fig. 12.5), species (Fig. 12.6) can use all the food in the
mussels and oysters as well as seaweed. pond without competing with each other. This
Oysters are also cultivated for the pearls increases the fish yield from the pond.
they make.

(a)
(b)

Macrobrachium rosenbergii Peneaus monodon

(fresh water) (marine)

Fig. 12.5 : Fresh water and marine prawns

(c)
(d)

As marine fish stocks get further depleted,
the demand for more fish can only be met by
such culture fisheries, a practice called
mariculture.

12.2.3 (ii)  INLAND FISHERIES (e)

Fresh water resources include canals, ponds, (f)
reservoirs and rivers. Brackish water
resources, where seawater and fresh water Fig. 12.6: (a) Catla (b) Silver carp  (c) Rohu (d) Grass
mix together, such as estuaries and lagoons Carp (e) Mrigal (f) Common Carp

are also important fish reservoirs. While
capture fishing is also done in such inland One problem with such composite fish
water bodies, the yield is not high. Most fish culture is that many of these fish breed only
production from these resources is through during monsoon. Even if fish seed is collected
aquaculture. from the wild, it can be mixed with that of

Fish culture is sometimes done in other species as well. So, a major problem in
combination with a rice crop, so that fish are fish farming is the lack of availability of good-
grown in the water in the paddy field. More quality seed. To overcome this problem, ways
intensive fish farming can be done in have now been worked out to breed these fish
composite fish culture systems. Both local in ponds using hormonal stimulation. This
and imported fish species are used in such has ensured the supply of pure fish seed in
systems. desired quantities.

IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 149

Reprint 2025-26



uestions

Q 1. How are fish obtained?
2. What are the advantages of

composite fish culture?

Activity _____________12.5
• Visit a fish farm in fish breeding (a) (b)

season and note the following:
(1) Varieties of fish in fish farm Fig. 12.7: (a) Arrangement of beehive in an apiary
(2) Types of ponds (b) honey extractor
(3) Feed ingredients used
(4) Production capacity of the farm This is the variety commonly used for
If there are no fish farms close to your commercial honey production.
locality, gather the above information from The Italian bees have high honey collection
Internet, by referring books or talking to capacity. They sting somewhat less. They stay
people who are engaged in fishery.

in a given beehive for long periods, and breed
very well. For commercial honey production,

12.2.4 BEE-KEEPING
bee farms or apiaries are established.

Honey is widely used and therefore bee- The value or quality of honey depends
keeping for making honey has become an upon the pasturage, or the flowers available
agricultural enterprise. Since bee-keeping to the bees for nectar and pollen collection.
needs low investments, farmers use it as an In addition to adequate quantity of pasturage,
additional income generating activity. In the kind of flowers available will determine
addition to honey, the beehives are a source the taste of the honey.
of wax which is used in various medicinal
preparations. uestions

The local varieties of bees used for
commercial honey production are Apis cerana 1. What are the desirable
indica, commonly known as the Indian bee,
A. dorsata, the rock bee and A. florae, the little
bee. An Italian bee variety, A. mellifera, has
also been brought in to increase yield of honey. Q characters of bee varieties

suitable for honey production?
2. What is pasturage and how is it

related to honey production?

What
you have
learnt
• There are several nutrients essential for crops. Of these,

some are required in large quantities and are known as
macro-nutrients whereas rest of the nutrients are required
in small quantities and are known as micro-nutrients.

• Manure and fertilizers are the main sources of nutrient
supply to crops.

• Organic farming is a farming system with minimal or no use
of chemicals as fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides etc. and

150 SCIENCE

Reprint 2025-26



with a maximum input of organic manures, recyled farm wastes, and
bio-agents, with healthy cropping systems.

• Mixed farming is a system of farming on a particular farm which
includes crop production, raising of livestock etc.

• Mixed cropping is growing of two or more crops simultaneously on the
same piece of land.

• Growing two or more crops in definite row patterns is known as inter-
cropping.

• The growing of different crops on a piece of land in pre-planned
succession is called crop rotation.

• Varietal improvement is required for higher yield, good quality, biotic
and abiotic resistance, shortening the maturity duration, wider
adaptability and desirable agronomic characteristics.

• Farm animals require proper care and management such as shelter,
feeding, breeding and disease control. This is called animal husbandry.

• Poultry farming is done to raise domestic fowls. Poultry production
includes egg production and broiler production for poultry meat.

• To enhance poultry production, cross breeding is done between Indian
and exotic breeds for variety improvement.

• Fish may be obtained from marine resources as well as inland
resources.

• To increase production of fish, they can be cultured in marine and
inland ecosystems.

• Marine fish capture is done by fishing nets guided by echo-sounders
and satellites.

• Composite fish culture system is commonly used for
fish farming.

• Bee-keeping is done to get honey and wax.

Exercises
1. Explain any one method of crop production which ensures high yield.
2. Why are manure and fertilizers used in fields?
3. What are the advantages of inter-cropping and crop rotation?
4. What is genetic manipulation? How is it useful in agricultural practices?
5. How do storage grain losses occur?
6. How do good animal husbandry practices benefit farmers?
7. What are the benefits of cattle farming?
8. For increasing production, what is common in poultry, fisheries and

bee-keeping?
9. How do you differentiate between capture fishing, mariculture and

aquaculture?

IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 151

Reprint 2025-26