6
POPULATION

an you imagine a world without human POPULATION SIZE AND DISTRIBUTION

Cbeings? Who would have utilised
India’s Population Size and Distribution

the resources and created social and
by Numbers

cultural environment? The people are
important to develop the economy and the India’s population as on March 2011 stood at
society. The people make and use resources 1,210.6 million, which account for more the
and are themselves resources with varying 17 per cent of the world’s population. These
quality.  Coal is but a piece of rock, until people 1.21 billion people are unevenly distributed
were able to invent technology to obtain it and over our country’s vast area of 3.28 million
make it ‘resource’. Natural events, like a flood square km, which accounts for 2.4 per cent of
or a Tsunami, becomes a ‘disaster’ only when the world’s area (Figure 6.1).
they affect a crowded village or a town. The 2011 Census data reveal that Uttar

Hence, population is the pivotal element in
Pradesh with a population size of 199 million

social studies. It is the point of reference from
is the most populous state of India. Uttar

which all other elements are observed and from
Pradesh accounts for about 16 per cent of the

which they derive significance and meaning.
‘Resources’, ‘calamities’ and ‘disasters’ are all country’s population.  On the other hand, the

meaningful only in relation to human beings. Himalayan state of Sikkim has a population of

Their numbers, distribution, growth and just about 0.6 million and Lakshadweep has

characteristics or qualities provide the basic only 64,429 people.

background for understanding and Almost half of India’s population lives in

appreciating all aspects of the environment. just five states. These are Uttar Pradesh,

Human beings are producers and Maharashtra, Bihar, West Bengal and Andhra
consumers of earth’s resources. Therefore, it Pradesh. Rajasthan, the biggest state in terms
is important to know how many people are of area, has only 5.5 per cent of the total
there in a country, where do they live, how and population of India (Figure 6.2)
why their numbers are increasing and what
are their characteristics.  The census of India   • What could be the reason
provides us with information regarding the of uneven distribution of population in India?
population of our country.

Census

A census is an official enumeration of population done periodically. In India, the first census was held in the year
1872. The first complete census, however, was taken in the year 1881. Since then, censuses have been held
regularly every tenth year.

The Indian Census is the most comprehensive source of demographic, social and economic data. Have you
ever seen a census report? Check in your library if it has one.

48 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I

Reprint 2025-26



India’s Population Distribution by Density
POPULATION

Population density provides a better picture
Rest of the world, 82.5%

of the uneven distribution. Population density
is calculated as the number of persons per unit
area. India is one of the most densely populated
countries of the world.

India, 17.5%

Only Bangladesh and Japan have
Do You Know higher average population densities

than India. Find out the population
AREA

densities of Bangladesh and Japan.
Rest of the world, 97.6%

The population density of India in the year
2011 was 382 persons per sq km. Densities
vary from 1,102 persons per sq km in Bihar to
only 17 persons per sq km in Arunachal

India, 2.4% Pradesh. A study of the Figure 6.3 shows the
pattern of uneven distribution of population

Fig 6.1 : India’s Share of World’s Area and Population densities at the State level.

Fig. 6.2: Distribution of Population
Source: Census of India, 2011

POPULATION 49

Reprint 2025-26



Fig. 6.3: Density of Population (Census of India 2011)

Note: Telangana became the 29th State of India in June 2014.
* State of Jammu and Kashmir was bifurcated into two union territories namely Jammu and

Kashmir and Ladakh on 05.08.19.

50 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I

Reprint 2025-26



Activity 2 per cent per annum means that in a given

Study the Figure 6.3 and compare it with year, there was an increase of two persons for
Figure 2.4 and Figure 4.7. Do you find any every 100 persons in the base population.  This

corelation between these maps? is referred to as the annual growth rate.
India’s population has been steadily

Note the States with population densities increasing from 361 million in 1951 to 1210

below 250 persons per square km. Rugged million in 2011.

terrain and unfavourable climatic conditions Table 6.1 : The Magnitude and Rate of India’s
Population Growth

are primarily responsible for sparse population
in these areas.  Which states have density below Year Total Absolute Annual

Population Increase in Growth
250 persons per square km?

(in million) the Decade Rate
Assam and most of the Peninsular states (in million) ( % )

have moderate population densities. Hilly, 1951  361.0 42.43 1.25
dissected and rocky nature of the terrain, 1961  439.2 78.15 1.96

moderate to low rainfall, shallow and less fertile 1971  548.2 108.92 2.20
1981  683.3 135.17 2.22

soils have influenced population densities in 1991  846.4 163.09 2.16
these areas. 2001 1028.7 182.32 1.97

The Northern plains and Kerala in the south 2011 1210.6 181.46 1.64

have high to very high population densities
because of the flat plains with fertile soils and Table 6.1 and Figures 6.4 (a) and 6.4 (b)
abundant rainfall. Identify the three states of reveal that from 1951 to 1981, the annual

the Northern Plains with high population rate of population growth was steadily

densities. increasing; which explains the rapid increase
in population from 361 million in 1951 to
683 million in 1981.

POPULATION GROWTH AND PROCESSES

OF POPULATION CHANGE •  Table 6.1 reveals that despite the
Population is a dynamic phenomenon. The decline in growth rates, the number of people being
numbers, distribution and composition of the added every decade is steadily increasing. Why?

population are constantly changing. This is the
influence of the interaction of the three processes, Since 1981, however, the rate of growth
namely — births, deaths and migrations. started declining gradually. During this period,

birth rates declined rapidly. Still 182 million
Population Growth people were added to the total population in

the 1990s alone (an annual addition larger
Growth of population refers to the change in

than ever before).
the number of inhabitants of a country/territory
during a specific period of time, say during the It is essential to realise that India has a very

last 10 years.  Such a change can be expressed large population. When a low annual rate is

in two ways: in terms of absolute numbers and applied to a very large population, it yields a

in terms of percentage change per year. large absolute increase. When more than a
The absolute numbers added each year or billion people increase even at a lower rate, the

decade is the magnitude of increase. It is total number  being added becomes very large.
obtained by simply subtracting the earlier India’s annual increase in population is large
population (e.g. that of 2001) from the later enough to neutralise efforts to conserve the
population (e.g. that of 2011).  It is referred to resource endowment and environment.
as the absolute increase.  The declining trend of the growth rate is

The rate or the pace of population increase indeed a positive indicator of the efforts of birth
is the other important aspect.  It is studied in

control. Despite that, the total additions to the
per cent per annum, e.g. a rate of increase of

population base continue to grow, and India

POPULATION 51

Reprint 2025-26



Fig. 6.4(a): India’s  Population Growth Rates during 1951-2011

 Fig. 6.4(b): India’s Population 1901-2011

has overtaken China in 2023 to become the most The natural increase of population is the
populous country in the world. (www.un.org.) difference between birth rates and death rates.

Birth rate is the number of live births per
Processes of Population Change/Growth thousand persons in a year. It is a major

There are three main processes of change of component of growth because in India, birth

population : birth rates, death rates and rates have always been higher than death

migration. rates.

52 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I

Reprint 2025-26



Death rate is the number of deaths per population in 1951 to 31.80 per cent in 2011.
thousand persons in a year. The main cause There has been a significant increase in the
of the rate of growth of the Indian population number of ‘million plus cities’ from 35 to 53 in

has been the rapid decline in death rates. just one decade, i.e., 2001 to 2011. In 2023

Till 1980, high birth rates and declining there were 59 million plus cities in India.

death rates led to a large difference between
Adolescent Population

birth rates and death rates resulting in higher
rates of population growth. Since 1981, birth The most significant feature of the Indian

rates have also started declining gradually, population is the size of its adolescent

resulting in a gradual decline in the rate of population.  It constitutes one-fifth of the total

population growth. What are the reasons for population of India.  Adolescents are,

this trend? generally, grouped in the age group of 10 to

The third component of population growth 19 years.  They are the most important
resource for the future. Nutrition

is migration. Migration is the movement of
requirements of adolescents are higher than

people across regions and territories. Migration
those of a normal child or adult.  Poor nutrition

can be internal (within the country) or
can lead to deficiency and stunted growth.

international (between the countries).
But in India,  the diet available to adolescents

Internal migration does not change the size
is inadequate in all nutrients. A large number

of the population, but influences the of adolescent girls suffer from anaemia. Their
distribution of population within the nation. problems have so far not received adequate
Migration plays a very significant role in attention in the process of development.  The
changing the composition and distribution of adolescent girls have to be sensitised to the
population. problems they confront. Awareness among

them can be improved through the spread of
Activity literacy and education.

On a map, trace the migration of each
of your grandparents and parents

National Population Policy
since their birth. Try and analyse the

reasons for each move. Recognising that the planning of families
would improve individual health and

In India, most migrations have been from welfare, the Government of India initiated a

rural to urban areas because of the “push” comprehensive Family Planning Programme

factor in rural areas. These are adverse in 1952. The Family Welfare Programme has

conditions of poverty and unemployment in the sought to promote responsible and planned

rural areas and the “pull” of the city in terms parenthood on a voluntary basis. The National
of increased employment opportunities and Population Policy (NPP) 2000 is a
better living conditions. culmination of years of planned efforts.

Migration is an important determinant of The NPP 2000 provides a policy
population change. It changes not only the framework for imparting free and compulsory
population size but also the population school education up to 14 years of age,
composition of urban and rural populations reducing infant mortality rate to below 30 per
in terms of age and sex composition. In India, 1000 live births, achieving universal
the rural-urban migration has resulted in a immunisation of children against all vaccine
steady increase in the percentage of population preventable diseases, promoting delayed
in cities and towns. The urban population has marriage for girls, and making family welfare
increased from 17.29 per cent of the total a people-centred programme.

POPULATION 53

Reprint 2025-26



EXERCISE

1. Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.

(i) Migrations change the number, distribution and composition of the
population in

(a) the area of departure (c) both the area of departure and arrival

(b) the area of arrival (d) none of the above

(ii) A large proportion of children in a population is a result of

(a) high birth rates (c) high death rates

(b) high life expectancies (d) more married couples

(iii) The magnitude of population growth refers to

(a) the total population of an area

(b) the number of persons added each year

(c) the rate at which the population increases

(d) the number of females per thousand males

(iv) According to the Census, a “literate” person is one who

(a) can read and write his/her name

(b) can read and write any language

(c) is 7 years old and can read and write any language with understanding

(d) knows the 3 ‘R’s (reading, writing, arithmetic)

2. Answer the following questions briefly.

(i) Why is the rate of population growth in India declining since 1981?

(ii) Discuss the major components of population growth.

(iii) Define age structure, death rate and birth rate.

(iv) How is migration a determinant factor of population change?

3. Distinguish between population growth and population change.

4. What is the relation between occupational structure and development?

5. What are the advantages of having a healthy population?

6. What are the significant features of the National Population Policy 2000?

PROJECT/ACTIVITY

Conduct a class census by preparing a questionnaire. The questionnaire
should contain minimum five questions. Questions should relate to students,
their family members, their class performance, their health, etc. Each student
is required to fill in the questionnaire. Compile the information in numerical
terms (in terms of percentage).  Present the information through pie-chart,
bar-diagram or in any other way.

54 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I

Reprint 2025-26



GLOSSARY

Adolescence : Adolescence is a period in which a person is no longer a child and
not yet an adult.  Such persons are grouped in the age group of
10 to 19 years.

Alluvial plain : A level tract of land made up of alluvium or fine rock material
brought down by a river.

Base population : The total population of an area at the beginning of a given time
period.

Biome : Plant communities occuring in distinct groups in areas having
similar climatic conditions.

Birth rate : The number of live births for every 1000 persons in a year.
Depression : In meteorology; it denotes an area of relatively low atmospheric

pressure, which is found mainly in temperate regions.  In geology,
it refers to a hollow sunken area of the earth’s surface.

Death rate : The number of deaths per 1000 persons in year.
Density of population : The average number of persons per unit area, such as a square

kilometre.
Dependency ratio : The ratio of people of dependent age (below 15 and above 60 years)

to people of economically active ages (15-59 years).
Ecosystem : A system which comprises the physical environment and the

organisms living therein.
Environment : Surroundings or the conditions under which a person or thing

exists and develops his or its character.  It covers both physical
and cultural elements.

Fault : A linear break in rocks of the earth’s crust along which there has
been displacement in a horizontal, vertical or oblique direction.

Fauna : The animal life of a given area.
Flora : The total vegetation or plant cover of a region.
Fold :  A bend in the rock strata resulting from compression of an area of

the earth’s crust.
Geosyncline : A narrow, shallow,  elongated basin with a sinking bottom in which

a considerable thickness of sediments was deposited by the rivers
coming from Angara and Gondwanaland.

Glacier : A mass of snow and ice that moves slowly under the influence of
gravity along a confined course away from its place of accumulation.

Growth rate of population : The growth rate of population indicates the rate at which the
population is growing.  In estimating the growth rate the increase
in population is compared with the base population.  It can be
measured annually or over a decade.

Indian mainland : It refers to the contiguous stretch of landmass from Jammu and
Kashmir to Kanniyakumari and from Gujarat to Arunachal Pradesh.

Indian Standard Time : The local time along the Standard Meridian of India (82°30'E).
Inland drainage : A drainage system in which the waters of the rivers do not reach

the oceans but fall into an inland sea or lake.

Reprint 2025-26



Igneous rocks : Rocks formed as a result of solidification of magma either below
the earth’s surface or above it.

Lagoon : A salt-water lake separated from the sea by the sandbars and spits.
Lake : A body of water that lies in a hollow in the earth’s surface and is

entirely surrounded by land.
Lithospheric plates : Large segments of the earth’s crust composed of continental and

oceanic lithospheric parts, floating above the asthenosphere.
Life expectancy : The average number of years one is expected to live.
Local time : The time of a place determined by the  midday sun is called the

local time.
Metamorphic rocks : Deformation and alteration of pre-existing igneous and

sedimentary rocks as a result of changes in physical and chemical
conditions due to intense heat or pressure.

Migration : Movement of people from one place to another.  Internal migration
means movement of people within a country and external migration
means movement of people between countries.  When people come
to a country from another country, it is called immigration and
when they leave that country, it is called emigration.

Million plus cities : Cities with a population of more than one million or 10 lakh.
Monsoon : A complete reversal of winds over a large area leading to a change

of seasons.
Mountain : An upward projected features of the earth’s surface that rises to

high altitude and usually possesses steep slopes.
National park : A reserved area for preserving its natural vegetation, wildlife and

the natural environment.
Plain : An extensive area of flat or gently undulating land.
Plateau : An extensive elevated area of relatively flat land.
Plate tectonics : The scientific concept that explains the movements of the crustal

plates.
Relief : The differences in elevation or the physical outline of the land

surface or ocean floor.
Subsidence : In meteorology, it is the downward movement of the air. In geology,

it refers to the sinking of a portion of the earth’s surface.
Sedimentary rocks : Rocks composed of sediments and generally having a layered

structure.
Sex-ratio : Sex-ratio is defined as the number of females per thousand males.
Subcontinent : A big landmass, which stands out as a distinct geographical unit

from the rest of the continent.
Tectonic : Forces originating within the earth and responsible for bringing

widespread changes in the landform features.
Young mountains : The fold mountains formed during the most recent major phase

of folding in the earth’s crust.

56 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I

Reprint 2025-26



Notes

Reprint 2025-26



Notes

Reprint 2025-26