3
Chapter Poverty as a Challenge

Overview
This chapter deals with one of the Poverty Index to analyse the problem of
challenges faced by independent India— poverty faced by the country. The ratio
poverty. After discussing this multi- of multidimensional poverty has fallen from
dimensional problem through examples, approximately 55 per cent in 2005–06,
the chapter discusses the way poverty is 25 per cent in 2015–16 and to 15 per cent
analysed by social scientists. Poverty in 2019–21. It is also expected that
trends in India and the world are multidimensional poverty will soon
illustrated through the concept of the reach single digit.
poverty line. Causes of poverty as well as
anti-poverty measures taken by the Two Typical Cases of Poverty
government are also discussed. The
chapter ends with broadening the official Urban Case
concept of poverty into human poverty. Thirty-three year old Ram Saran works

as a daily-wage labourer in a wheat flour
Introduction mill near Ranchi in Jharkhand. He
In our daily life, we come across many manages to earn around `3,500 a
people who we think are poor. They could month when he finds employment,
be landless labourers in villages or which is not often. The money is not
people living in overcrowded jhuggis in enough to sustain his family of six— his
cities. NITI Aayog uses Multidimensional

Picture 3.1  Story  of Ram Saran

  Poverty as a Challenge   29

Reprint 2025-26



wife and four children aged between 12 Rural case
years to six months. He has to send Lakha Singh belongs to a small village
money home to his old parents who live near Meerut in Uttar Pradesh. His
in a village near Ramgarh. His father, family does not own any land. So, they
a landless labourer, and his brother do odd jobs for the big farmers. Work
who lives in Hazaribagh depend on Ram is erratic and so is income. At times
Saran for sustenance. Ram Saran lives they get paid `200 for a hard day’s
in a one-room rented house in a work. But often it is in kind like a few
crowded basti in the outskirts of the kilograms of wheat or dal or even
city. It is a temporary shack built of vegetables for toiling in the farm
bricks and clay tiles. His wife Santa throughout the day. The family of six
Devi, works as a part time maid in a are barely able to  manage two square
few houses and manages to earn meals a day. Lakha lives in a kuchha

another hut on the outskirts of the village. The
`1500. They manage a meagre

meal of dal and rice twice a day, but women of the family spend the day

there is never enough for all of them. chopping fodder and collecting

His elder son works as a helper in a firewood in the fields. His father, a

tea shop to supplement the family’s tuberculosis patient, passed away two
years ago due to lack of medication.

income and earns another `700 while
His mother now suffers from the same

his 10-year old daughter goes to school
disease and life is slowly ebbing away.

and takes care of the younger siblings.
Although, the village has a primary

They have only two pairs of hand-me-
school, Lakha never went there but

down clothes each. New ones are
he is happy to find his children going

bought only when the old clothes
to school. New clothes happen once

become unwearable. Shoes are a luxury.
in a few years. Even soap and oil

The younger one relishes the dal-rice are a luxury for the family.
served at school.

Study the above cases of poverty
and discuss the following issues
related to poverty:

• Landlessness

• Unemployment

• Size of families

• Literacy levels

• Health/nutrition

• Helplessness

Picture 3.2  Story  of Lakha Singh

30   Economics

Reprint 2025-26



These two typical cases illustrate many Social Exclusion
dimensions of poverty. They show that According to this concept, poverty
poverty means hunger and lack of shelter. must be seen in terms of the poor
This also speaks about a situation in which having to live only in a poor
parents are not able to give their children surrounding with other poor people,
nutritious food three times a day or a excluded from enjoying social
situation where sick people cannot afford equality of better-off people in better

surroundings. Social exclusion can
treatment. Poverty also means lack of

be both a cause as well as a
clean water and sanitation facilities. It also consequence of poverty in the usual
means lack of a regular job with decent sense. Broadly, it is a process through
minimum wages. Above all, it means living which individuals or groups are
with a sense of helplessness. Poor people excluded from facilities, benefits and
are in a situation in which they are ill- opportunities that others (the
treated at almost every place, in farms, “better-offs”) enjoy. A typical

factories, government offices, hospitals, example is the working of the caste
system in India in which people

railway stations, etc. Obviously, nobody belonging to certain castes are
would like to live in poverty. excluded from equal opportunities.

One of the biggest challenges of Social exclusion thus may lead to
independent India has been to bring or can cause more damage than
millions of its people out of abject poverty. having a very low income.
Mahatama Gandhi said that India would Vulnerability
be truly independent only when the poorest
of its people become free of human Vulnerability to poverty is a

measure, which describes the
suffering.

greater probability of certain
Poverty as seen by social scientists communities (say, members of a

backward caste) or individuals (such
Since poverty has many facets, social as a widow or a physically
scientists look at it through a variety of handicapped person) of becoming or
indicators. Usually the indicators are used remaining poor. Vulnerability is
to relate with the levels of income and determined by the options available
consumption. In recent times, a variety of to different communities for finding
other indicators have also been used to an alternative living in terms of
recognise whether a person is poor or not. assets, education, health and job
For example, National Multidimensional opportunities. Further, it is analysed
Poverty Index is calculated on the basis of on the basis of the greater risks these

three broad indicators: health indicators groups face at the time of natural
disasters (earthquakes, tsunami).

like nutrition, child and adolescent
Additional analysis is made of their

mortality, maternal health. Education social and economic ability to handle
indicators like years of schooling and school these risks. In fact, vulnerability
attendance, and standard of living indicator describes the greater probability of
like cooking fuel, sanitation, drinking water, being more adversely affected than
housing, electricity, assets, bank account. other people when bad time comes
Indicators such as social exclusion and for everybody, whether a flood or an
vulnerability are also used to understand earthquake or simply a fall in the
poverty (see box). availability of jobs!

Poverty as a Challenge    31

Reprint 2025-26



Poverty Line buying these calorie requirements in terms

At the centre of the discussion on poverty of food grains, etc., and reported by

is the concept of the ‘poverty line’. A families has been considered as poverty
common method used to measure poverty line. This amount was revised periodically,
is based on the income or consumption taking into consideration the rise in prices.
levels. The term ‘consumption’ means the Based on the global developments, the

amount spent on various items such as Government of India has begun to

food, clothing, etc., by a family. A person estimate the proportion of poor in India

is considered poor if his or her income or using 12 developmental indicators, which

consumption level falls below a given is popularly known as Multidimensional

‘minimum level’ necessary to fulfill the Poverty Index (see box). This national

basic needs. What is necessary to satisfy index complements the income or

basic needs is different at different times consumption expenditure based poverty

and in different countries. Therefore, measurement because it measures and

poverty line may vary with time and place. compares deprivations directly.

Each country uses an imaginary line that   Let’s Discuss
is considered appropriate for its existing
level of development and its accepted Discuss the following:

minimum social norms. For example, a • What could be the difference between
person not having a car in the United consumption based expenditure
States may be considered poor. In India, Poverty Line and National
owning a car is still considered a luxury. Multidimensional Poverty Index?

While determining the poverty line in • What do you think would be the
India, till a few years ago, a minimum “minimum necessary level” in your
level of food requirement, clothing, locality?
footwear, fuel and electricity, educational
and medical needs, etc., were taken into Poverty Estimates
consideration. The physical quantities  of Based on the methodology described in
these needs were multiplied by their the previous section, the number and
prices in rupees. The formula for food proportion of poor people in India, called
requirement while estimating the Head Count Ratio (HCR),  is estimated.
poverty line was based on the desired Table 3.1 shows that during the 1990s,
calorie requirement. Food items, such the proportion of ‘consumption
as cereals, pulses, vegetables, milk, oil, expenditure based’ poor declined from
sugar, etc., together provided these 45 to 37 per cent. However, the number
needed calories. The calorie needs vary of poor remained at about 40 crores.
depending on age, sex and the type of During 2000–2011, both the proportion
work that a person does. The accepted and the number of poor declined. The
average calorie requirement in India was proportion of multidimensional poor
2400 calories per person per day in rural during 2015–2021 declined from 25 to
areas and 2100 calories per person per 15 percent. As per the official record,
day in urban areas. Since people living 13.5 crore people have escaped
in rural areas engage themselves in more multidimensional poverty during this
physical work, calorie requirements in period. Specifically deprivation  against
rural areas were considered to be higher various indicators have declined more
than in urban areas. The bare monetary sharply in rural areas than in urban
expenditure per capita needed for areas.

32    Economics

Reprint 2025-26



Table 3.1: Estimates of Poverty in India 1993 – 2019

Year Head Count Ratio (%) Number of poor (in millions)

Rural Urban Total Rural Urban Combined
Consumption-based

1993–94 50 32 45 329 75 404
2004–05 42 26 37 326 81 407
2009–10 34 21 30 278 76 355
2011–12 26 14 22 217 53 270

Multidimensional (Indicator) based
2015-16 32.6 8.7 25 NA NA NA
2019-21 19.3 5.3 15 NA NA NA

Source:  India in figures, 2018, Government of India Central Statistics office,
   niti.gov.in/state-statistics (accessed on Nov. 15, 2021); National Multidimensional

Poverty Index: A Progress Review 2023, NITI Aayog, Government of India.

Twelve Indicators of National Multidimensional Poverty Index
NITI Aayog, a Government of India organisation evolved the National Multidimensional
Poverty Index (NMPI) using the following 12 indicators. If an individual is found
deprived on these indicators, he or she is considered as multidimensional poor.

1. Nutrition: A household is considered deprived if any child between the ages
of 0 to 59 months, or woman between the ages of 15 to 49 years, or man
between the ages of 15 to 54 years is found to be undernourished.

2. Child-Adolescent Mortality: A household is deprived if any child or adolescent
under 18 years of age has died in the household in the five-year period
preceding the survey.

3. Maternal Health: A household is deprived if any woman in the household
who has given birth in the 5 years preceding the survey has not received
assistance from trained skilled medical personnel during the recent childbirth.

4. Years of Schooling: A household is deprived if not even one member of the
household aged 10 years or older has completed six years of schooling.

5. School attendance: A household is deprived if any school-aged child is not
attending school up to the age at which he/she would complete class.

6. Cooking Fuel: A household is deprived if a household cooks with dung,
agricultural crops, shrubs, wood, charcoal, or coal.

7. Sanitation: A household is deprived if the household has unimproved or no
sanitation facility or it is improved but shared with other households.

8. Drinking Water: A household is deprived if the household does not have access
to improved drinking water or safe drinking water is at least a 30-minute
walk  from home (as a round trip).

9. Housing: A household is deprived if the household has inadequate housing: the floor
is made of natural materials, or the roof or wall are made of rudimentary materials.

10. Electricity: A household is deprived if the household has no electricity.
11. Assets: A household is deprived if the household does not own more than one

of these assets: radio, TV, telephone, computer, animal cart, bicycle, motorbike,
or refrigerator; and does not own a car or truck.

12. Bank Account: A household is deprived if no household member has a bank
account or a post office account.

Source:  https://www.undp.org/india/national-multidimensional-poverty-index-progress-review-2023
  Poverty as a Challenge   33

Reprint 2025-26



  Let’s Discuss   Let’s Discuss

Study Table 3.1 and answer the following Study the Graph 3.1 and do the following:
questions: • Identify the three states where the HCR
• Even if poverty ratio declined between is the highest.

1993–94 and 2004–05, why did the • Identify the three states where HCR
number of poor remain at about 407 is the lowest.
million? • List the states which have HCR lower

• Are the dynamics of poverty reduction or higher than HCR for all India.

the same in rural and urban India?
Graph 3.1: Head Count Ratio in selected Indian States, 2019 – 21

Source:  https://www.niti.gov.in/sites/default/files/2023-08/India-National-Multidimentional-
Poverty-Index-2023.pdf

Inter-State Disparities resource development. In West Bengal,
Poverty in India also has another aspect land reform measures have helped in
or dimension. The proportion of poor people reducing poverty. In Andhra Pradesh and
is not the same in every state (see graph Tamil Nadu public distribution of food
3.1). Although state level poverty has grains have been responsible for the
witnessed a significant decline from the improvement.
levels of early seventies, the success rate of

Vulnerable Groups
reducing poverty varies from state to state.
It is pertinent to note that the states of The proportion of people below poverty
Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Delhi, Punjab, line is also not same for all social groups
Himachal Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, and economic categories in India. Social
Haryana and Maharashtra had an HCR groups, which are most vulnerable to
which was less than 10 per cent in 2019– poverty are Scheduled Caste and
21. In the meantime, remarkable strides Scheduled Tribe households. Similarly,
have been made by States like Bihar, Uttar among the economic groups, the most
Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan. vulnerable groups are the rural
Studies also show states following different agricultural-labour households and the
steps to reduce poverty. For example, urban casual-labour households. Graph
Kerala has focused more on human 3.2 shows the percentage of poor people

34    Economics

Reprint 2025-26

Odisha

Tamil Nadu



in all these groups. Although the average Global Poverty Scenario
of people below poverty line for all groups Is India the only country having poor
in India is 22; however, 43 out of 100 (see people? For making comparisons between
graph 3.2) people belonging to Scheduled developing countries, many international
Tribes are not able to meet their basic organisations like the World Bank use a
needs. Similarly, 34 per cent of casual uniform standard for the poverty line:
workers in urban areas are below poverty minimum availability of the equivalent of
line. About 34 per cent of casual farm $2.15 per person per day. The proportion
labour (in rural areas) and 29 per cent of people in different countries living in
of Scheduled Castes are also poor. The extreme economic poverty— defined by the
double disadvantage of being a landless World Bank as living on less than $2.15

casual wage labour household in the per day— has fallen from 16.27 per cent

socially disadvantaged social groups of in 2010 to 9.05 per cent in 2019. Why $
(dollar) has been used there? In India, we

the scheduled caste or the scheduled
use rupee as a national currency, each

tribe population highlights the
country has its own currency. American

seriousness of the problem. Some recent
dollar is used by international agencies to

studies have shown that except for the compare data across countries.
scheduled tribe households, all the other Although there has been a substantial
three groups (i.e., Scheduled Castes, reduction in global poverty, it is marked
rural agricultural labourers and the with great regional differences. Poverty
urban casual labour households) have declined substantially in China and
seen a decline in poverty in the 1990s. Southeast Asian countries as a result

Apart from these social groups, there of rapid economic growth and massive
is also inequality of incomes within a investments in human resource
family. In poor families all suffer, but development (Read table 3.2 and graph
some suffer more than others. In some 3.3 and 3.4). The proportion of poor in
cases, women, elderly people and female China has become 0.1 per cent in 2020.
infants are denied equal access to The World Bank reports reveal that in the
resources available to the family. countries of South Asia (India, Pakistan,

Graph 3.2: Poverty in India 2011–12: Most Vulnerable Groups

Source:  www.worldbank.org/2016/India-s-Poverty-Profile (accessed on 29.09.2021)

  Poverty as a Challenge   35

Reprint 2025-26



Sri Lanka, Nepal, Bangladesh, Bhutan, In Sub-Saharan Africa, poverty in fact
Afghanistan and Maldives) the decline has declined from 36.6 per cent in 2017
has also been rapid from 13 per cent in to 35 per cent in 2019 (see graph 3.3).
2017 to 11 per cent in 2021. With decline In Latin America and Caribbean, the
in the percentage of the poor, the number ratio of poverty has increased from 4.4
of poor has also declined significantly from per cent in 2017 to 4.6 per cent in 2021.
233 million in 2017 to 207 million in 2021. Poverty has also resurfaced at 3 per cent

Table 3.2: Head Count Ratio Comparison in 2000 in some of the former socialist
among Some  Selected Countries countries like Russia, where officially it

was non-existent earlier.
Country % of Population below

$2.15 a day (2017 ppp)
  Let’s Discuss

1. Nigeria 30.9 (2018)
2. Bangladesh 9.6 (2022) Study Graphs 3.3 and 3.4 and do the
3. India 11.9 (2021) following:
4. Pakistan 4.9 (2018) • Identify the areas of the world where
5. China 0.1 (2020) poverty ratios have declined.
6. Brazil 5.8 (2021)

• Identify the area of the globe which has
7. Indonesia 2.5 (2022)

the largest concentration of the poor.
8. Sri Lanka 1.0 (2019)

• Why do dif ferent countries use
Source: Poverty and Equity Database, World different poverty lines?
Bank Data; (databank.worldbank.org)

Graph 3.3: Share of people living on a day, 2005–2019

140

120

100

South Asia

80
La!n America and Carribean

Sub-Saharan Africa
60

East Asia and Pacific 

40 China

20

0

2005 2010 2013 2015 2019

Year

Source: Poverty and Equity Database; World Bank
(http://databank.worldbank.org/data/reports.aspx?source=poverty-and-equity-database)

36    Economics

Reprint 2025-26

Percentage



Graph 3.4: Number of poor by region in millions

By 2030, forecasts indicate that nearly 9 in10 of the extreme poor will live in Sub-Saharan Africa.

Source: World Bank PovcalNet and Poverty & Equity Data Portal
(http://databank.worldbank.org/data/reports.aspx?source=poverty-and-equity-database)

Poverty and Sustainable
The United Nations (UN) Organisation,

Development Goals
an international organisation works

The new Sustainable Development Goals with many countries to eradicate
of the United Nations (UN) propose ending poverty. In collaboration with
poverty of all types by 2030. It provides a governments of member countries, UN
shared blueprint for peace and prosperity came out with 17 Sustainable
for people and the planet, now  and into Development Goals (SDGs) to be
the future. At its centre point are the 17 achieved by 2030.  They are given in
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). the form of infographics on the next
This requires urgent action from the part page. Each goal was split into various
of both the developed and the developing targets to be achieved by the countries
countries (see box). who are members of UN. One of the

Developed countries ought to support targets of SDG 1 is reducing the

the developing countries in the endeavour proportion of men, women and children

of ending poverty, improve health and in all ages living in poverty in all its

education, reduce inequalities, tackling dimensions at least to half by 2030. The

climate change and promote sustainable decline in the proportion of poor reflects

development. India’s commitment to achieve the
target related to Goal 1: No Poverty (End
poverty in all its forms everywhere).

  Poverty as a Challenge   37

Reprint 2025-26



Source: https://sdgs.un.org/goals

Take the help of your teacher and of poverty, largely a rural phenomenon also
gather the details of each SDG. Do a became a feature of urban India.
project report on how your country/ Another feature of high poverty rates
state is achieving these goals. has been the huge income inequalities.

One of the major reasons for this is the
Causes of Poverty

unequal distribution of land and other
There were number of causes for the resources. Despite many policies, we have
widespread poverty in India. One historical not been able to tackle the issue of
reason is the low level of economic poverty. Major policy initiatives like land
development under the British colonial reforms which aimed at redistribution of
administration. The policies of the colonial assets in rural areas have not been
government ruined traditional handicrafts implemented effectively by most of the
and discouraged development of industries state governments. Effective
like textiles. The low rate of growth persisted implementation of policy could have
until the 1980s. This resulted in less job improved the life of millions of rural poor.
opportunities and low growth rate of  Many other socio-cultural and
incomes. This was accompanied by a high economic factors are also responsible for
growth of population. poverty. In order to fulfil social

With the spread of irrigation and the obligations and observe religious
Green Revolution, many job opportunities were ceremonies, people in India, including
created in the agriculture sector. But the impact the very poor, spend a lot of money and
was limited to some parts of India. The waste their hard earned income. Small
industries, both in the public and the private farmers need money to buy agricultural
sector, did provide some jobs. But these were inputs like seeds, fertilizer, pesticides,
not enough to absorb all the job seekers. etc. Since poor people hardly have any
Unable to find jobs with better income in cities, savings, they borrow or accept loan at
many people started working as rickshaw higher risk. Unable to repay because of
pullers, vendors, construction workers, poverty, they become victims of
domestic servants, etc. With irregular small indebtedness. So the high level of
incomes, these people could not afford indebtedness is both the cause and effect
reasonable shelter. They started living in slums of poverty.
on the outskirts of the cities and the problems

38    Economics

Reprint 2025-26



economic returns by investing in
  Let’s Discuss education. The poor may not be able to

Observe some of the poor families take advantage from the opportunities
around you and try to find the following: created by economic growth. However,

• Which social and economic group do growth in the agriculture sector is much
they belong to? below expectations. This has a direct

• Who are the earning members in the bearing on poverty. A large number of poor
family? people live in villages and are dependent

• What is the condition of the old people on agriculture.
in the family? In these circumstances, there is a clear

• Are all the children (both boys and girls) need for targeted anti-poverty
attending schools? programmes. Although there are many

schemes which are formulated to affect
Anti-Poverty Measures poverty directly or indirectly. Some of them
Removal of poverty has been one of the are worth mentioning.
major objectives of Indian developmental Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
strategy. The current anti-poverty Employment Guarantee  Act, 2005 aims
strategy of the government is based to provide 100 days of wage employment
broadly on two factors — (i) promotion to every household to ensure livelihood
of economic growth (ii) targeted anti-

security in rural areas. It also aimed at
poverty programmes.

sustainable development to address the
Over a period of thirty years of

independent India, lasting up to the early cause of drought, deforestration and soil

eighties, there were little per capita erosion. One-third of the proposed jobs

income growth and not much reduction have been reserved for women under this

in poverty. Official poverty estimates act. The wage rate for unskilled manual

which were about 45 per cent in the early workers is revised regularly,

1950s remained the same even in the Pradhan Mantri Poshan Shakti

early eighties. Since the eighties, India’s Abhiyan (PM Poshan) is a flagship

economic growth has been one of the programme of Government of India. It

fastest in the world. The growth rate was initiated with twin purpose — (i) to

jumped from the average of about 3.5 improve the nutritional requirement

per cent a year in the 1970s to about 6 especially calorie and the protein intake

per cent during the 1980s and 1990s. of the child, (ii) improve the school

The two decades of 21st century enrolment and eliminate the drop out

(2000–2020) has also witnessed the rapid from the school. It targets students from

economic development. The higher Classes I to VIII in Government,

growth rates have significantly helped in Government aided schools and special
the reduction of poverty. Therefore, it is training centres under the Right to
becoming clear that there is a strong link Education Act.
between economic growth and poverty This scheme is implemented with the
reduction. Economic growth widens support of local governments and various
opportunities and provides the resources community organisations. This programme
needed to invest in human development. encourages poor children, belonging to
This also encourages people to send disadvantaged sections, to attend school
their children, including the girl child, to more regularly and helps them concentrate
schools in the hope of getting better on classroom activities.

  Poverty as a Challenge   39

Reprint 2025-26



Pradhan Mantri Surakshit Matritva The Challenges Ahead
Abhiyan was launched in 2016 with the aim Poverty has certainly declined in India. But
to reduce maternal and infant mortality by

despite the progress, poverty reduction
providing quality antenatal care to the

remains India’s most compelling challenge.
pregnant women throughout the country.
The scheme works towards  safe Wide disparities in poverty are visible

pregnancies, deliveries and addresses gaps between rural and urban areas and
in the service of the maternal care, to ensure among different States also. Certain social
constant and regular treatment to the and economic groups are more vulnerable
beneficiaries. Services are provided on the to poverty. Poverty reduction is expected
ninth day of every month. This programme to make better India. This would be
follows a systematic approach for possible mainly due to higher economic
engagement with private practitioners, growth, increasing focus on universal
motivating them to volunteer in the scheme

education, declining population growth;
at government health facilities.

Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY) empowerment of the women and the

aims towards women empowerment in economically weaker sections of society

rural areas. It encourages the use of would also facilitate the same.
smoke-free kitchen, thereby, saving them The income based definition of poverty
from chronic respiratory disorders and captures only a limited part of what
poor eye sights. It was launched in 2016 poverty really means to people. It is about
with an aim to provide clean cooking fuel a ‘minimum’ subsistence level of living
(liquefied petroleum gas or LPG) to rather than a ‘reasonable’ level of living.
economically poor households especially Many scholars advocate that we must
in the rural areas, who cook using broaden the concept into human poverty. A
traditional methods by using either coal, large number of people may have been able
wood or cow dungs. Its target beneficiaries to feed themselves. But do they have
are Below Poverty Line (BPL) households,

education? Or shelter? Or health care?
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes,

Or job security? Or self-confidence? Are
forest dwellers and marginalised group
households. To encourage the use of LPG, they free from caste and gender

the scheme provides a completely free discrimination? Is the practice of child

connection, including the first refill  and labour still common? Worldwide
a stove. experience shows that with development,

Over the years there is an increase in the definition of what constitutes poverty
the LPG coverage throughout the country. also changes. In this chapter we have
Connections are issued in the name of the looked at the different approaches to
female member of the family. This scheme measure poverty. The National
also promotes environment sustainability Multidimensional Poverty Index put
by reducing deforestation and carbon forward by NITI Aayog reveals that the
emission generated from burning coal and

number and proportion of
firewood. The use of clean cooking fuel,
i.e., LPG means less time and effort in multidimensionally poor has declined in

collecting firewood and encourages women India. This may be due to the array of

to participate in social and economic Government interventions initiated in
activities. recent years. What do you think?

40    Economics

Reprint 2025-26



  Summary

In this chapter, we have looked at the different approaches of measuring poverty. The National
Multidimensional Poverty Index, put forward by NITI Aayog in collaboration with UNDP and Oxford
Policy and Human Development Initiative reveals that on the Headcount Ratio of multidimensionally
poor, there has been a considerable reduction. Even when some of the states like Kerala and Tamil
Nadu have reached less than 10 per cent on the HCR front, much is yet to be achieved by the other
states. However, it is also to be noted that due to the array of Government intervention policies
between 2005–06 and 2019–21 there has been significant decline in the number of MPI poor in the
states of Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan.

  Exercises

1. How is the poverty line estimated in India?
2. Do you think that the present methodology of poverty estimation is appropriate?
3. Describe poverty trends in India since 1993.
4. Discuss the major reasons for poverty in India.
5. Identify the social and economic groups which are most vulnerable to poverty in India.
6. Give an account of interstate disparities of poverty in India.
7. Describe global poverty trends.
8. Describe the role of government in reducing poverty in India?

  9. What do you understand by human poverty?
 10. Who are the poorest of the poor?
 11. What are the main features of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment

Guarantee Act 2005?
 12. Differentiate between consumption based poverty line and NMP Index  based

poverty estimates.
 13. List the indicators used to estimate multidimensional poor in India.

  References

DEATON, ANGUS AND VALERIE KOZEL  (Eds.) 2005. The Great Indian Poverty Debate.  MacMillan
India Limited, New Delhi.

Economic Survey 2015–2016. Ministry of Finance, Government of India, New Delhi. (Chapter on
social sectors, [Online web] URL: http://indiabudget.nic.in/es_2004–05/social.htm)

Mid-Term Appraisal of the Tenth Five Year Plan 2002–2007. Planning Commission, New Delhi. Part
II, Chapter 7: Poverty Elimination and Rural Employment, [Online web] URL: http://
www.planningcommission.nic.in/midterm/english-pdf/chapter-07.pdf

NITI Aayog. 2023 National Multidimensional Poverty Index: A Progress Review 2023 NITI
Aayog/Government of India

PANAGRIYA ARVIND AND VISHAL MORE ‘Poverty by social, religious and economic groups in India and its
largest state’, working paper no. 2013-14, Programme on Indian economic policies, Columbia
University.

Tenth Five Year Plan 2002–2007. Planning Commission, New Delhi. (Chapter 3.2, Poverty Alleviation
in Rural India: Strategy and Programmes, [Online web] URL: http://
www.planningcommission.nic.in/plans/planrel/fiveyr/10th/volume2/v2_ch3_2.pdf

World Development Indicators 2016.  Featuring the Sustainable Development Goals, The World
Bank.

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2023. 2023 Global Multidimensional Poverty Index
(MPI): Unstacking global poverty: Data for high impact action. New York.

  Poverty as a Challenge   41

Reprint 2025-26